The Man Who Desired Gold 

Bansir, the chariot builder of Babylon, was thoroughly discouraged. From his seat upon the low 
wall surrounding his property, he gazed sadly at his simple home and the open workshop in which 
stood a partially completed chariot. 

His wife frequently appeared at the open door. Her furtive glances in his direction reminded 
him that the meal bag was almost empty and he should be at work finishing the chariot, hammering and 
hewing, polishing and painting, stretching taut the leather over the wheel rims, preparing it for delivery 
so he could collect from his wealthy customer. 

Nevertheless, his fat, muscular body sat stolidly upon the wall. His slow mind was struggling 
patiently with a problem for which he could find no answer. The hot, tropical sun, so typical of this 
valley of the Euphrates, beat down upon him mercilessly. Beads of perspiration formed upon his brow 
and trickled down unnoticed to lose themselves in tie hairy jungle on his chest. 

Beyond his home towered the high terraced wall surrounding the king's palace. Nearby, 
cleaving the blue heavens, was the painted tower of the Temple of Bel. In the shadow of such grandeur 
was his simple home and many others far less neat and well cared for. Babylon was like this — a 
mixture of grandeur and squalor, of dazzling wealth and direst poverty, crowded together without plan 
or system within the protecting walls of the city. 

Behind him, had he cared to turn and look, the noisy chariots of the rich jostled and crowded 
aside the sandaled tradesmen as well as the barefooted beggars. Even the rich were forced to turn into 
the gutters to clear the way for the long lines of slave water carriers, on the "King's Business," 15each 
bearing a heavy goatskin of water to be poured upon the hanging gardens. 

Bansir was too engrossed in his own problem to hear or heed the confused hubbub of the busy 
city. It was the unexpected twanging of the strings from a familiar lyre that aroused him from his 
reverie. He turned and looked into the sensitive, smiling face of his best friend — Kobbi, the musician. 

"May the Gods bless thee with great liberality, my good friend," began Kobbi with an elaborate 
salute. "Yet, it does appear they have already been so generous thou needest not to labor. I rejoice with 
thee in thy good fortune. More, I would even share it with thee. Pray, from thy purse which must be 
bulging else thou wouldst be busy in your shop, extract but two humble shekels and lend them to me 
until after the noblemen's feast this night. Thou wilt not miss them ere they are returned." 

"If I did have two shekels," Bansir responded gloomily, "to no one could I lend them — not even 
to you, my best of friends; for they would be my fortune — my entire fortune. No one lends his entire 
fortune, not even to his best friend." 

"What," exclaimed Kobbi with genuine surprise, "Thou hast not one shekel in thy purse, yet sit 
like a statue upon a wall! Why not complete that chariot? How else canst thou provide for thy noble 
appetite? Tis not like thee, my friend. Where is thy endless energy? Doth something distress thee? Have 
the Gods brought to thee troubles?" 

"A torment from the Gods it must be," Bansir agreed. "It began with a dream, a senseless 
dream, in which I thought I was a man of means. From my belt hung a handsome purse, heavy with 
coins. There were shekels which I cast with careless freedom to the beggars; there were pieces of silver 
with which I did buy finery for my wife and whatever I did desire for myself; there were pieces of gold 
which made me feel assured of the future and unafraid to spend the silver. A glorious feeling of 
contentment was within me! You would not have known me for thy hardworking friend. Nor wouldst 
have known my wife, so free from wrinkles was her face and shining with happiness. She was again the 
smiling maiden of our early married days." 

8 



"A pleasant dream, indeed," commented Kobbi, "but why should such pleasant feelings as it 
aroused turn thee into a glum statue upon the wall?" 

"Why, indeed! Because when I awoke and remembered how empty was my purse, a feeling of 
rebellion swept over me. Let us talk it over together, for, as the sailors do say, we ride in the same boat, 
we two. As youngsters, we went together to the priests to learn wisdom. As young men, we shared each 
other's pleasures. As grown men, we have always been close friends. We have been contented subjects 
of our kind. We have been satisfied to work long hours and spend our earnings freely. We have earned 
much coin in the years that have passed, yet to know the joys that come from wealth, we must dream 
about them. Bah! Are we more than dumb sheep? We live in the richest city in all the world. The 
travelers do say none equals it in wealth. About us is much display of wealth, but of it we ourselves 
have naught. After half a lifetime of hard labor, thou, my best of friends, hast an empty purse and sayest 
to me, "May I borrow such a trifle as two shekels until after the noblemen's feast this night?" Then, 
what do I reply? Do I say, "Here is my purse; its contents will I gladly share?' No, I admit that my purse 
is as empty as thine. What is the matter? Why cannot we acquire silver and gold — more than enough 
for food and robes? 

"Consider, also, our sons," Bansir continued, "are they not 17following in the footsteps of their 
fathers? Need they and their families and their sons and their sons' families live all their lives in the 
midst of such treasurers of gold, and yet, like us, be content to banquet upon sour goat's milk and 
porridge?" 

"Never, in all the years of our friendship, didst thou talk like this before, Bansir." Kobbi was 
puzzled. 

"Never in all those years did I think like this before. From early dawn until darkness stopped 
me, I have labored to build the finest chariots any man could make, soft- heartedly hoping some day the 
Gods would recognize my worthy deeds and bestow upon me great prosperity. This they have never 
done. At last, I realize this they will never do. Therefore, my heart is sad. I wish to be a man of means. I 
wish to own lands and cattle, to have fine robes and coins in my purse. I am willing to work for these 
things with all the strength in my back, with all the skill in my hands, with all the cunning in my mind, 
but I wish my labors to be fairly rewarded. What is the matter with us? Again I ask you ! Why cannot 
we have our just share of the good things so plentiful for those who have the gold with which to buy 
them?" 

"Would I knew an answer!" Kobbi replied. "No better than thou am I satisfied. My earnings 
from my lyre are quickly gone. Often must I plan and scheme that my family be not hungry. Also, 
within my breast is a deep longing for a lyre large enough that it may truly sing the strains of music that 
do surge through my mind. With such an instrument could I make music finer than even the king has 
heard before. " 

"Such a lyre thou shouldst have. No man in all Babylon could make it sing more sweetly; could 
make it sing so sweetly, not only the king but the Gods themselves would be delighted. But how mayest 
thou secure it while we both of us are as poor as the king's slaves? Listen to the bell! Here they come." 
He pointed to the long column of half naked, sweating water bearers plodding laboriously up the 
narrow street from the river. Five abreast they marched, each bent under a heavy goatskin of water. 

"A fine figure of a man, he who doth lead them." Kobbi indicated the wearer of the bell who 
marched in front without a load. "A prominent man in his own country, 'tis easy to see." 

"There are many good figures in the line," Bansir agreed, "as good men as we. Tall, blond men 
from the north, laughing black men from the south, little brown men from the nearer countries. All 
marching together from the river to the gardens, back and forth, day after day, year after year. Naught 
of happiness to look forward to. Beds of straw upon which to sleep — hard grain porridge to eat. Pity the 
poor brutes, Kobbi!" 



"Pity them I do. Yet, thou dost make me see how little better off are we, free men though we 
call ourselves." 

That is truth, Kobbi, unpleasant thought though it be. We do not wish to go on year after year 
living slavish lives. Working, working, working! Getting nowhere." 

"Might we not find out how others acquire gold and do as they do?" Kobbi inquired. 

"Perhaps there is some secret we might learn if we but sought from those who knew," replied 
Bansir thoughtfully. 

"This very day," suggested Kobbi, "I did pass our old friend, Arkad, riding in his golden 
chariot. This I will say, he did not look over my humble head as many in his station might consider his 
right. Instead, he did wave his hand that all onlookers might see him pay greetings and bestow his smile 
of friendship upon Kobbi, the musician." 

"He is claimed to be the richest man in all Babylon," Bansir mused. 

"So rich the king is said to seek his golden aid in affairs of the treasury," Kobbi replied. "So 
rich," Bansir interrupted, "I fear if I should meet him in the darkness of the night, I should lay my 
hands upon his fat wallet" 

"Nonsense," reproved Kobbi, "a man's wealth is not in the purse he carries. A fat purse quickly 
empties if there be no golden stream to refill it. Arkad has an income that constantly keeps his purse 
full, no matter how liberally he spends." 

"Income, that is the thing," ejaculated Bansir. "I wish an income that will keep flowing into my 
purse whether I sit upon the wall or travel to far lands. Arkad must know how a man can make an 
income for himself. Dost suppose it is something he could make clear to a mind as slow as mine?" 

"Methinks he did teach his knowledge to his son, Nomasir," Kobbi responded. "Did he not go 
to Nineveh and, so it is told at the inn, become, without aid from his father, one of the richest men in 
that city?" 

"Kobbi, thou bringest to me a rare thought." A new light gleamed in Bansir's eyes. "It costs 
nothing to ask wise advice from a good friend and Arkad was always that. Never mind though our 
purses be as empty as the falcon's nest of a year ago. Let that not detain us. We are weary of being 
without gold in the midst of plenty. We wish to become men of means. Come, let us go to Arkad and 
ask how we, also, may acquire incomes for ourselves." 

Thou speakest with true inspiration, Bansir. Thou bringeth to my mind a new understanding. 
Thou makest me to realize the reason why we have never found any measure of wealth. We never 
sought it. Thou hast labored patiently to build the staunchest chariots in Babylon. To that purpose was 
devoted your best endeavors. Therefore, at it thou didst succeed. I strove to become a skillful lyre 
player. And, at it I did succeed. 

"In those things toward which we exerted our best endeavors we succeeded. The Gods were 
content to let us continue thus. Now, at last, we see a light, bright like that from the rising sun. It 
biddeth us to learn more that we may prosper more. With a new understanding we shall find honorable 
ways to accomplish our desires." 

"Let us go to Arkad this very day," Bansir urged, "Also, let us ask other friends of our boyhood 
days, who have fared no better than ourselves, to join us that they, too, may share in his wisdom." 

"Thou wert ever thus thoughtful of thy friends, Bansir. Therefore hast thou many friends. It 
shall be as thou sayest. We go this day and take them with us." 



10 



