THE FOURTH CURE 
Guard thy treasures from loss 

"Misfortune loves a shining mark. Gold in a man's purse must be guarded with firmness, else it 
be lost. Thus it is wise that we must first secure small amounts and learn to protect them before the 
Gods entrust us with larger." So spoke Arkad upon the fourth day to his class. 

"Every owner of gold is tempted by opportunities whereby it would seem that he could make 
large sums by its investment in most plausible projects. Often friends and relatives are eagerly entering 
such investment and urge him to follow. 

"The first sound principle of investment is security for thy principal. Is it wise to be intrigued 
by larger earnings when thy principal may be lost? I say not. The penalty of risk is probable loss. Study 
carefully, before parting with thy treasure, each assurance that it may be safely reclaimed. Be not 
misled by thine own romantic desires to make wealth rapidly. 

"Before thou loan it to any man assure thyself of his ability to repay and his reputation for 
doing so, that thou mayest not unwittingly be making him a present of thy hard-earned treasure. 

"Before thou entrust it as an investment in any field acquaint thyself with the dangers which 
may beset it. 

"My own first investment was a tragedy to me at the time. The guarded savings of a year I did 
entrust to a brickmaker, named Azmur, who was traveling over the far seas and in Tyre agreed to buy 
for me the rare jewels of the Phoenicians. These we would sell upon his return and divide the profits. 
The Phoenicians were scoundrels and sold him bits of glass. My treasure was lost. Today, my training 
would show to me at once the folly of entrusting a brickmaker to buy jewels. 

"Therefore, do I advise thee from the wisdom of my experiences: be not too confident of thine 
own wisdom in entrusting thy treasures to the possible pitfalls of investments. Better by far to consult 
the wisdom of those experienced in handling money for profit. Such advice is freely given for the 
asking and may readily possess a value equal in gold to the sum thou considerest investing. In truth, 
such is its actual value if it save thee from loss. 

"This, then, is the fourth cure for a lean purse, and of great importance if it prevent thy purse 
from being emptied once it has become well filled. Guard thy treasure from loss by investing only 
where thy principal is safe, where it may be reclaimed if desirable, and where thou will not fail to 
collect a fair rental. Consult with wise men. Secure the advice of those experienced in the profitable 
handling of gold. Let their wisdom protect thy treasure from unsafe 47 investments." 



