THE FIFTH CURE 
Make of thy dwelling a profitable investment 

"If a man setteth aside nine parts of his earnings upon which to live and enjoy life, and if any 
part of this nine parts he can turn into a profitable investment without detriment to his wellbeing, then 
so much faster will his treasures grow." So spake Arkad to his class at their fifth lesson. 

"All too many of our men of Babylon do raise their families in unseemly quarters. They do pay 
to exacting landlords liberal rentals for rooms where their wives have not a spot to raise the blooms that 
gladden a woman's heart and their children have no place to play their games except in the unclean 

22 



alleys. 

"No man's family can fully enjoy life unless they do have a plot of ground wherein children can 
play in the clean earth and where the wife may raise not only blossoms but good rich herbs to feed her 
family. 

"To a man's heart it brings gladness to eat the figs from his own trees and the grapes of his own 
vines. To own his own domicile and to have it a place he is proud to care for, putteth confidence in his 
heart and greater effort behind all his endeavors. Therefore, do I recommend that every man own the 
roof that sheltereth him and his. 

"Nor is it beyond the ability of any well intentioned man to own his home. Hath not our great 
king so widely extended the walls of Babylon that within them much land is now 48unused and may be 
purchased at sums most reasonable? 

"Also I say to you, my students, that the money lenders gladly consider the desires of men who 
seek homes and land for their families. Readily may thou borrow to pay the brickmaker and the builder 
for such commendable purposes, if thou can show a reasonable portion of the necessary sum which 
thou thyself hath provided for the purpose. 

"Then when the house be built, thou canst pay the money lender with the same regularity as 
thou didst pay the landlord. Because each payment will reduce thy indebtedness to the money lender, a 
few years will satisfy his loan. 

"Then will thy heart be glad because thou wilt own in thy own right a valuable property and thy 
only cost will be the king's taxes. 

"Also wilt thy good wife go more often to the river to wash thy robes, that each time returning 
she may bring a goatskin of water to pour upon the growing things. 

"Thus come many blessings to the man who owneth his own house. And greatly will it reduce 
his cost of living, making available more of his earnings for pleasures and the gratification of his 
desires. This, then, is the fifth cure for a lean purse: wn thy own home" 



