The Five Laws of Gold 

"A bag heavy with gold or a clay tablet carved with words of wisdom; if thou hadst thy choice, 
which wouldst thou choose?" 

By the flickering light from the fire of desert shrubs, the sun-tanned faces of the listeners 
gleamed with interest. 

"The gold, the gold," chorused the twenty-seven. 

Old Kalabab smiled knowingly. 

"Hark," he resumed, raising his hand. "Hear the wild dogs out there in the night. They howl and 
wail because they are lean with hunger. Yet feed them, and what do they? Fight and strut. Then fight 
and strut some more, giving no thought to the morrow that will surely come. 

"Just so it is with the sons of men. Give them a choice of gold and wisdom — what do they do? 
Ignore the wisdom and waste the gold. On the morrow they wail because they have no more gold. 

"Gold is reserved for those who know its laws and abide by them." 

Kalabab drew his white robe close about his lean legs, for a cool night wind was blowing. 

"Because thou hast served me faithfully upon our long journey, because thou cared well for my 
camels, because thou toiled uncomplainingly across the hot sands of the desert, because thou fought 
bravely the robbers that sought to despoil my merchandise, I will tell thee this night the tale of the five 
laws of gold, such a tale as thou never hast heard before. 

"Hark ye, with deep attention to the words I speak, for if you grasp their meaning and heed 
them, in the days that come thou shalt have much gold." 

He paused impressively. Above in a canopy of blue, the stars shone brightly in the crystal clear 
skies of Babylonia. Behind the group loomed their faded tents tightly staked against possible desert 
storms. Beside the tents were neatly stacked bales of merchandise covered with skins. Nearby the 
camel herd sprawled in the sand, some chewing their cuds contentedly, others snoring in hoarse 
discord. 

"Thou hast told us many good tales, Kalabab," spoke up the chief packer. "We look to thy 
wisdom to guide us upon the morrow when our service with thee shall be at an end." 

"I have but told thee of my adventures in strange and distant lands, but this night I shall tell thee 
of the wisdom of Arkad, the wise rich man." 

"Much have we heard of him," acknowledged the chief packer, "for he was the richest man that 
ever lived in Babylon." 

"The richest man he was, and that because be was wise in the ways of gold, even as no man had 
ever been before him. This night shall I tell you of his great wisdom as it was told to me by Nomasir, 
his son, many years ago in Nineveh, when I was but a lad. 

"My master and myself had tarried long into the night in the palace of Nomasir. I had helped 
my master bring great bundles of fine rugs, each one to be tried by Nomasir until his choice of colors 
was satisfied. At last he was well pleased and commanded us to sit with him and to drink a rare vintage 
odorous to the nostrils and most warming to my stomach, which was unaccustomed to such a drink. 

"Then, did he tell us this tale of the great wisdom of Arkad, his father, even as I shall tell it to 
you. 

"In Babylon it is the custom, as you know, that the sons of wealthy fathers live with their 
parents in expectation of inheriting the estate. Arkad did not approve of this custom. Therefore, when 
Nomasir reached man's estate, he sent for the young man and addressed him: 

" 'My son, it is my desire that thou succeed to my estate. Thou must, however, first prove that 
thou art capable of wisely handling it. Therefore, I wish that thou go out into the world and show thy 

34 



ability both to acquire gold and to make thyself respected among men. 

" 'To start thee well, I will give thee two things of which I, myself, was denied when I started as 
a poor youth to build up a fortune. 

" 'First, I give thee this bag of gold. If thou use it wisely, it will be the basis of thy future 
success. 

" 'Second, I give thee this clay tablet upon which is carved the five laws of gold. If thou dost 
but interpret them in thy own acts, they shall bring thee competence and security. 

" 'Ten years from this day come thou back to the house of thy father and give account of 
thyself. If thou prove worthy, I will then make thee the heir to my estate. Otherwise, I will give it to the 
priests that they may barter for my soul the land consideration of the gods.' 

"So Nomasir went forth to make his own way, taking his bag of gold, the clay tablet carefully 
wrapped in silken cloth, his slave and the horses upon which they rode. 

"The ten years passed, and Nomasir, as he had agreed, returned to the house of his father who 
provided a great feast in his honor, to which he invited many friends and relatives. After the feast was 
over, the father and mother mounted their throne-like seats at one side of the great hall, and Nomasir 
stood before them to give an account of himself as he had promised his father. 

It was evening. The room was hazy with smoke from the wicks of the oil lamps that but dimly 
lighted it. Slaves in white woven jackets and tunics fanned the humid air rhythmically with long- 
stemmed palm leaves. A stately dignity colored the scene. The wife of Nomasir and his two young 
sons, with friends and other members of the family, sat upon rugs behind him, eager listeners. 

" 'My father,' he began deferentially, I bow before thy wisdom. Ten years ago when I stood at 
the gates of manhood, thou bade me go forth and become a man among men, instead of remaining a 
vassal to thy fortune. 

" 'Thou gave me liberally of thy gold. Thou gave me liberally of thy wisdom. Of the gold, alas! 
I must admit of a disastrous handling. It fled, indeed, from my inexperienced hands even as a wild hare 
flees at the first opportunity from the youth who captures it.' 

"The father smiled indulgently. 'Continue, my son, thy tale interests me in all its details.' 

" 'I decided to go to Nineveh, as it was a growing city, believing that I might find there 
opportunities. I joined a caravan and among its members made numerous friends. Two well-spoken 
men who had a most beautiful white horse as fleet as the wind were among these. 

" 'As we journeyed, they told me in confidence that in Nineveh was a wealthy man who owned 
a horse so swift that it had never been beaten. Its owner believed that no horse living could run with 
greater speed. Therefore, would he wager any sum however large that his horse could outspeed any 
horse in all Babylonia. Compared to their horse, so my friends said, it was but a lumbering ass that 
could be beaten with ease. 

" 'They offered, as a great favor, to permit me to join them in a wager. I was quite carried away 
with the plan. 

" 'Our horse was badly beaten and I lost much of my gold.' The father laughed. 'Later, I 
discovered that this was a deceitful plan of these men and they constantly journeyed with caravans 
seeking victims. You see, the man in Nineveh was their partner and shared with them the bets he won. 
This shrewd deceit taught me my first lesson in looking out for myself. 

" 'I was soon to learn another, equally bitter. In the caravan was another young man with whom 
I became quite friendly. He was the son of wealthy parents and, like myself, journeying to Nineveh to 
find a suitable location. Not long after our arrival, he told me that a merchant had died and his shop 
with its rich merchandise and patronage could be secured at a paltry price. Saying that we would be 
equal partners but first he must return to Babylon to secure his gold, he prevailed upon me to purchase 
the stock with my gold, agreeing that his would be used later to carry on our venture. 

35 



" 'He long delayed the trip to Babylon, proving in the meantime to be an unwise buyer and a 
foolish spender. I finally put him out, but not before the business had deteriorated to where we had only 
unsalable goods and no gold to buy other goods. I sacrificed what was left to an Israelite for a pitiful 
sum. 

" 'Soon there followed, I tell you, my father, bitter days. I sought employment and found it not, 
for I was without trade or training that would enable me to earn. I sold my horses. I sold my slave. I 
sold my extra robes that I might have food and a place to sleep, but each day grim want crouched 
closer. 

" 'But in those bitter days, I remembered thy confidence in me, my father. Thou hadst sent me 
forth to become a man, and this I was determined to accomplish.' The mother buried her face and wept 
softly. " 'At this time, I bethought me of the table thou had given to me upon which thou had carved the 
five laws of gold. Thereupon, I read most carefully thy words of wisdom, and realized that had I but 
sought wisdom first, my gold would not have been lost to me. 

I learned by heart each law and determined that, when once more the goddess of good fortune 
smiled upon me, I would be guided by the wisdom of age and not by the inexperience of youth. 

" 'For the benefit of you who are seated here this night, I will read the wisdom of my father as 
engraved upon the clay tablet which he gave to me ten years ago: 



